docs:punctuation-V2 (#264)
siemens/ix-docs: docs/guidelines/language/basics/punctuation.md

---
sidebar_position: 3
sidebar_label: Punctuation
title: Punctuation
doc-type: 'banner'
component-tabs: ['']
no_single_tab: true
description: 'We recommend a minimal approach to punctuation as it can add cognitive load and presents consistency challenges across products, portfolios and teams.'
---

#

> ## Ampersand &

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Ampersand `&`
```
Having the symbol next to the name feels off, I first thought something's missing afterwards 😂  would it be an idea to wrap it in a code element? - would also be better for screen readers aaand AI<

(Needs to be changed for all headings)

Author: yes will do for all for accessibility

    <ul aria-label="Recommended practices">
      <li>customer’s role (single customer)</li>
      <li>customers’ roles (multiple customers)</li>
      <li>The folder’s contents are displayed in the dashboard.</li>
      <li>Today’s date is displayed in the banner.</li>
    </ul>
  </div>
</div>

With our minimal punctuation approach, we limit apostrophes by using nouns as adjectives.

<div class="dos-and-donts">
  <div class="dos">
    <ul aria-label="Recommended practices">
      <li>Select file location.</li>
      <li>Edit user profile information.</li>
      <li>View employee details.</li>
      <li>Set time format.</li>
    </ul>
  </div>
  <div class="donts">
    <ul aria-label="Practices to avoid">
      <li>Select the file’s location.</li>
      <li>Edit user’s profile information.</li>
      <li>View employee’s details.</li>
      <li>Set the time’s format.</li>
    </ul>
  </div>
</div>

## Asterisk *

Use a single asterisk to indicate required fields. Place them immediately after the text without a space. A legend explaining what the asterisk means, typically at the top of forms, is no longer necessary as asterisks are widely understood to mean mandatory.

> Note: If your design system adds asterisks automatically via attributes, remove the manual symbol to prevent duplication.

Reviewer: 1. you could link here: https://ix.siemens.io/docs/components/forms-field
2. Maybe use an admonition?
3. "if your design system ..." feels weird, considering we're on the iX website

Author: 1. will add link - ok 
2. leave as note instead of a warning - thats probably too strong. 
3. Change to: "Consider adding asterisks automatically via attributes within your component to remove the manual load and prevent duplication. "

Reviewer 2: Done

<div class="dos-and-donts">
  <div class="dos">
    <ul aria-label="Recommended practices">
      <li>Device name*</li>
    </ul>
  </div>
  <div class="donts">
    <ul aria-label="Practices to avoid">
      <li>Device name *</li>
    </ul>
  </div>
</div>

## Bullet points &nbsp;&nbsp;&bull;

Use bullet points to break down complex information into scannable, digestible chunks. They help users quickly identify key points and reduce cognitive load. Use consistent bullet styles within a single list or section.

For unordered lists, use round bullets (•). For ordered lists, use numbers followed by a period (1.). Maintain parallel structure; if one item is a complete sentence, make all items complete sentences.

Add one space after the bullet point or number before the text begins.

<div class="dos-and-donts">
  <div class="dos">
    <ul aria-label="Recommended practices">
      <li>Key features:<br/>&nbsp;&nbsp;&bull; Real-time monitoring<br/>&nbsp;&nbsp;&bull; Automated alerts<br/>&nbsp;&nbsp;&bull; Custom dashboards</li>
      <li>Setup steps:<br/>1 Connect device<br/>2. Configure settings<br/>3. Start monitoring</li>

>       <li>Benefits include:<br/>&nbsp;&nbsp;&bull; Increased efficiency across all operations.<br/>&nbsp;&nbsp;&bull; Reduced downtime through predictive maintenance.<br/>&nbsp;&nbsp;&bull; Enhanced visibility into system performance.</li>

Reviewer: Did you try to just have a native HTML list instead of using plain characters? Note that using plain symbols instead of an actuall bullet/numbered list will cause some problems (just like in word, for example) - e.g. a second line of text will not align with the text but the bullet point

See [bullet point list](https://www.w3schools.com/tags/tryit.asp?filename=tryhtml_lists4) and [number list](https://www.w3schools.com/tags/tryit.asp?filename=tryhtml_lists)

Author: varun also does not know how to do this - if you can support with this - great.

    </ul>
  </div>
</div>

## Colon :

Use to introduce lists, options, descriptions, settings and preferences to visually separate labels and input fields. Colons help to enhance readability when both the labels and input area are not visually distinguishable. When it’s clear within the interface what needs to be completed, remove the colon.

<div class="dos-and-donts">
  <div class="dos">
    <ul aria-label="Recommended practices">
      <li>Username <span style={{color: 'yellow'}}>Felix</span> (color to distinguish fields)</li>
      <li>Username: Felix (colon to visually separate label and field)</li>
    </ul>
  </div>
</div>

## Comma ,

Use commas to separate data in lists for clarity.

<div class="dos-and-donts">
  <div class="dos">
    <ul aria-label="Recommended practices">
      <li>Jane Roe, Admin, 3 plant zones</li>
    </ul>
  </div>
  <div class="donts">
    <ul aria-label="Practices to avoid">
      <li>Jane Roe Admin 3 plant zones</li>
    </ul>
  </div>
</div>

> The Oxford comma is placed before the final “and” or “or” in a list of three or more items. It is acceptable to use and can help avoid ambiguity, but omit it when space is limited in the UI. Remove the Oxford comma especially if it causes text to wrap or overflow in constrained UI elements such as labels, tooltips, or buttons.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Oxford comma is placed before the final “and” or “or” in a list of three or more items. It is acceptable to use and can help avoid ambiguity, but omit it when space is limited in the UI. Remove the Oxford comma especially if it causes text to wrap or overflow in constrained UI elements, e.g. labels, tooltips or buttons.
```

Reviewer 2: We stick to "such as" but we remove the comma.

<div class="dos-and-donts">
  <div class="dos">
    <ul aria-label="Recommended practices">

>       <li>Save, print, or share this document.</li>

Reviewer: Was the coma before "or" intentional? (same for the other lines)

Reviewer 2: I removed the comma.

  <div class="dos">
    <ul aria-label="Recommended practices">
      <li>Save as</li>
    </ul>
  </div>
  <div class="donts">
    <ul aria-label="Practices to avoid">
      <li>Save as…</li>
    </ul>
  </div>
</div>

## Hyphen ‐

Hyphens join words together (drop-down menu) and connect prefixes to words (non-technical). Use hyphens to avoid confusion and enhance readability. Never use spaces before or after the hyphen.

<div class="dos-and-donts">
  <div class="dos">
    <ul aria-label="Recommended practices">
      <li>read-only memory</li>
      <li>user-friendly</li>
      <li>pre-provisioned</li>
    </ul>
  </div>
  <div class="donts">
    <ul aria-label="Practices to avoid">
      <li>preprovisioned</li>
    </ul>
  </div>
</div>

Remove hyphens for widely understood terms that have evolved beyond needing them.

<div class="dos-and-donts">
  <div class="dos">
    <ul aria-label="Recommended practices">
      <li>email</li>
      <li>database</li>
      <li>ecommerce</li>
    </ul>
  </div>
  <div class="donts">
    <ul aria-label="Practices to avoid">
      <li>e-mail</li>
      <li>data-base</li>
      <li>e-commerce</li>
    </ul>
  </div>
</div>

## Minus sign −

> Use the proper minus sign (−) rather than a hyphen (-) when expressing negative values or subtraction. In UI contexts such as labels, values, or data displays, the minus sign should be used to ensure mathematical clarity. The minus sign should be placed directly before the number with no intervening space except for mathematical operations for readability. 

Reviewer: you could link to the formatting section for numbers

Reviewer 2: yes, link added

When creating lists or using bullet points, use full stops for full sentences. If even one item in your list requires a full stop, add full stops to all items to keep punctuation consistent.

<div class="dos-and-donts">
  <div class="dos">
    <ul aria-label="Recommended practices">
      <li>List items:<br/>
      &nbsp;&nbsp;&bull; Quick setup<br/>
      &nbsp;&nbsp;&bull; Easy integration<br/>
      &nbsp;&nbsp;&bull; 24/7 support</li>
    </ul>
  </div>
</div>
<div class="dos-and-donts">
  <div class="dos">
    <ul aria-label="Recommended practices">
      <li>List items:<br/>
      &nbsp;&nbsp;&bull; Quick setup is available.<br/>
      &nbsp;&nbsp;&bull; Easy integration with existing systems.<br/>
      &nbsp;&nbsp;&bull; 24/7 support for all users.</li>
    </ul>
  </div>
</div>

We do not use full stops for toast messages (brief pop-ups), headings, titles or icon/button text labels. No space before a full stop. Only one space after a full stop between sentences.

<div class="dos-and-donts">
  <div class="dos">
    <ul aria-label="Recommended practices">
      <li>Assets deleted (toast message)</li>
      <li>Home (icon label)</li>
    </ul>
  </div>
  <div class="donts">

>     <ul aria-label="Practices to avoid">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Why not have one block of dodont with two checkmark-bullets points?

      <li>File path: ~ / Documents / Projects</li>
      <li>Processing time: ~5minutes</li>
    </ul>
  </div>
</div>

## Trademark symbols ™ ®

Use the correct symbol for the correct context. ™ is used for unregistered trademarks, ® is used for registered trademarks. Always follow Siemens brand guidelines when applying trademark symbols to product and service names.

Only use the trademark symbol on the first mention of the name on a page or screen. Don't repeat it every time the name appears.

Never place a space between the name and the symbol. Don't alter the size or position of the symbol, it should always appear as a superscript.

<div class="dos-and-donts">
  <div class="dos">
    <ul aria-label="Recommended practices">
      <li>BrandName™</li>
      <li>BrandName®</li>
    </ul>
  </div>
  <div class="donts">
    <ul aria-label="Practices to avoid">
      <li>BrandName ™</li>
      <li>BrandName ™®</li>
    </ul>
  </div>
</div>

Note: If you are unsure whether a product name is a registered or unregistered trademark, check with your legal or brand team before publishing. Using the wrong symbol can have legal implications.

## Punctuation and spacing

> Spaces before punctuation: As a general rule, there are no spaces between text and its following punctuation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Spaces before punctuation:** As a general rule, there are no spaces between text and its following punctuation.
```
Would make it bold (same for the others)

Reviewer 2: Done
